## 🦋 Hypothesis: Immunologic Paradox Driving Negative Neuroendocrine Epigenetic Changes 
In modern medicine, mental health issues are often thought to be manifestations of neurochemical imbalances. However, emerging research suggests immunologic activation can play a key role.

This subject experienced a notable cognitive decline that aligned with the timeline the nodules first appeared based on photographic evidence. Specifically, this individual experienced new onset severe insomnia, anxiety, depression, and social withdrawal about a year before the first photographic evidence where the nodules were shown to have grown to a significant, visible and palpable size. Interestingly, this correlated with new onset immunologic and inflammatory symptoms (e.g., unexplained rashes and boils/funrucles, joint pain (arthralgia), and mild non-pitting edema). This repository explores the connection between regulatory T-cells (Tregs) and thyroglobulin (Tg), based on a recent study showing a significant connection.

It is hypothesized that the driver of the subject's decade-long struggle with mental health issues may be significantly exacerbated (or even partly caused by) the constant leak of thyroglobulin from these nodules. Despite consistent euthyroid status (normal thyroid hormone levels on more than three serum blood tests), this individual exhibits profoundly high Thyroglobulin levels (554 ng/mL). Thyroglobulin is a large storage protein that acts as the scaffold for thyroid hormone synthesis. It normally stays localized to the thyroid, and this individual's profoundly high levels suggest it is significantly leaking into the systemic circulation. High Tg concentrations were found to downregulate *FOXP3*, *TGF-β* and *IL-10* mRNA expression in Tregs in vitro [1](#ref1).

Tregs are colloquially known as the "peacekeepers" of the immune system, because they help downregulate inflammatory responses. Gao et al. (2023) found significant evidence to suggest Tregs play a role in depressive disorders by modulating inflammatory responses [2](#ref2). The etiology of these neuroendocrine issues is thought to be connected to Treg dysregulation due to the nodules, further compounded and hypersensitized due to the baseline autistic metabolic and neural circuit.

## References
1. <a id="ref1"></a> Hu, Y., Li, N., Jiang, P., Cheng, L., Ding, B., Liu, X. M., He, K., Zhu, Y. Q., Liu, B. L., Cao, X., Zhou, H., & Mao, X. M. (2019). Elevated thyroglobulin level is associated with dysfunction of regulatory T cells in patients with thyroid nodules. Endocrine connections, 8(4), 309–317. https://doi.org/10.1530/EC-18-0545
2. Gao, X., Tang, Y., Kong, L., Fan, Y., Wang, C., & Wang, R. (2023). Treg cell: Critical role of regulatory T-cells in depression. *Pharmacological Research*, *195*, Article 106893. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.phrs.2023.106893
